Add documentation for global filters (#516)
kubearchive/kubearchive: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/configuration/global-filters.adoc

= Configuring Global Filters on KubeArchive

KubeArchive allows cluster owners to configure a set of filters that are applied

> to any KubeArchive-enabled namespace. To configure them follow the next steps:

Reviewer: What does "KubeArchive-enabled namespace" mean? Should the user set up specific permissions to the namespace they want to be managed by a global workspace?

Author: Hmm.. I tried to come up with a fancy word for "namespace where you already have a KubeArchiveConfig", but since its not mentioned anywhere else I can use the full phrase. Any other ideas?

Reviewer: Maybe we could go with the same approach than with the acronyms: stating at the begining what "KubeArchive-enabled namespace" means so we can refer to it in the rest of the page.

Something like:

```To get a namespaced managed by a global filter the namespace must contain a KubeArchiveConfig. This CR could have the following placeholder values if no aditional archiving logic need to be provided:

<insert a KAC CR with placeholder values>

From now on we will refer to these namespaces as "KubeArchive-enabled namespaces".
```

Author: We don't use it here that much, I opted for the phrase.

Reviewer: I am ok with that. But what about showing an example of a dummy KubeArchiveConfig resource so that the namespace take the configuration of the global filter without adding new filters?
For that case could this work?

```yaml
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: ns
spec:
  resources: []
```

Reviewer: I see - https://github.com/kubearchive/kubearchive/issues/526

Reviewer 2: I think this works:
```---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: ns
spec:
  ```
  The `resources` are optional.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see the bug in #526. We still need to create the global filters in this case.

Reviewer 2: > That does not work currently, we have a story to solve it.

From the users perspective this may appear to be working!

Reviewer 2: > "any namespace where you already have a KubeArchiveConfig"

I would suggest "any namespace containing a `KubeArchiveConfig` custom resource".

1. Create a `KubeArchiveConfig` in the `kubearchive` namespace. The rules
in this configuration apply to all KubeArchive-enabled namespaces. For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: kubearchive
spec:
  resources:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: v1
        kind: Pod
      archiveOnDelete: "true"
----

1. Create a `KubeArchiveConfig` on the namespace you want the global filters to apply. This
configuration could be empty or add its own filters as well. Both global and per-namespace
filters are combined. For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: my-team
spec:
  resources:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: batch/v1
        kind: Job
      archiveWhen: has(status.startTime)
      deleteWhen: has(status.completionTime)
----
+
In the namespace `my-team` KubeArchive archives jobs as long as they have `status.startTime`
and deletes them when they have `status.completionTime`. KubeArchive also archives pods when

> they are about to be deleted, as configured in the global filters.

Reviewer: As a user I have some questions after reading this example:

* With this example I get that KubeArchiveConfig is "merged" for any namespace with the global one in the `kubearchive` namespace, but does the global KubeArchiveConfig apply on `my-team` namespace if I don't have any `KubeArchiveConfig` configured?

* Also, what if I want `my-team` namespace not to have their pods archived? How should I configure the KubeArchiveConfig in `kubearchive` namespace for that?

I believe that the second question could be answered with a `KubeArchiveConfig` like the following:

```
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: kubearchive
spec:
  resources:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: v1
        kind: Pod
        selector:
          matchExpressions:
            - key: prevent-archive
              operator: DoesNotExist
      archiveOnDelete: "true"
```

And make sure that the pods of the `my-team` namespace have that label applied

Author: > With this example I get that KubeArchiveConfig is "merged" for any namespace with the global one in the kubearchive namespace, but does the global KubeArchiveConfig apply on my-team namespace if I don't have any KubeArchiveConfig configured?

The docs say:

>  Create a `KubeArchiveConfig` on the namespace you want the global filters to apply. This
configuration could be empty or add its own filters as well. Both global and per-namespace
filters are combined. For example:

I think that solves the question.

> Also, what if I want my-team namespace not to have their pods archived? How should I configure the KubeArchiveConfig in kubearchive namespace for that?

With this I can be more clear. There is nothing you can do to avoid Pods being archived in this scenario other than removing the filter from the global filters.

Reviewer: > I think that solves the question.

Yes, my bad, I overlooked that paragraph.

> With this I can be more clear. There is nothing you can do to avoid Pods being archived in this scenario other than removing the filter from the global filters.

I think it's good to be explicit about that but why not showing also the workaround of the labels?
I have also checked our current [KubeArchiveConfig CRD section](https://kubearchive.github.io/kubearchive/main/configuration/kubearchiveconfig.html) and there is nothing related to the label filtering, any reason not to show an example of the usage?

Reviewer 2: > if the cluster owners are willing to let cluster users avoid their filters.

I don't understand this statement. This is *not* possible.

Global filters are always or'd with the users filters, so they are always in effect. The user cannot control this at all. Essentially, all they can do is add additional filtering.

Reviewer: Imagine that the owner of the cluster has configured that a resource of a specific kind, say, `Pods` need to be always deleted and archived when finished.

Let's say me and my team are running some tests on our namespace of a controller that manages the pods. 
I want the pods to be removed by the controller and I don't need the data of those pods because that's not the point of the test.

I may want to talk to the cluster admin and say "hey, please give me a way to label or categorize these pods I am creating so that they aren't managed by kubearchive when they finish". 
If that's the case the admin may want to modify the global filter to provide a label that means "do not archive/delete" this `Pod`.

My point here was to provide an example of this type of global configuration filter for a case like this.

Of course, global filters are added to the users filters, but if the cluster admin *is willing* to provide a label for preventing the archive/deletion of the resource, that could be done.

Reviewer 2: I don't see how this works. Are you saying this is some functionality that `ApiServerSource` provides that would allow exclusion of pods with a particular label?  We have changed to a global (single) `ApiServerSource` instance, and I don't think there's a way there to provide this functionality per-namespace.

= Configuring Global Filters on KubeArchive

> KubeArchive allows cluster owners to configure global filters. Those are applied

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
KubeArchive allows cluster owners to configure global filters. These filters are applied
```

to any KubeArchive namespace containing a `KubeArchiveConfig` custom resource.

To configure the global filters create a `KubeArchiveConfig` in the

> "kubearchive" namespace. Because it is created on the "kubearchive" namespace

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"kubearchive" namespace. When it is created in the "kubearchive" namespace
```

these filters are considered global:

[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: kubearchive
spec:
  resources:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: v1
        kind: Pod
      archiveOnDelete: "true"
----

== Interaction With Local Filters

Global filters only work in namespaces containing a `KubeArchiveConfig` custom
resource. These can be understood as "local" filters in opposition with global
filters. Both global and local filters are combined and used for that specific

> namespace.

Reviewer 3: you mention that both the local and global filters are combined, but I think we should explicitly mention that we combine the results using an or, not an and

> For example the following `KubeArchiveConfig` on the namespace "my-team" KubeArchive

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example the following `KubeArchiveConfig` in the namespace "my-team" KubeArchive
```

archives jobs as long as they have `status.startTime` and deletes them when they
have `status.completionTime`. However KubeArchive also archives pods when they are
about to be deleted, as configured in the global filters in the previous section:

[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: my-team
spec:
  resources:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: batch/v1
        kind: Job
      archiveWhen: has(status.startTime)
      deleteWhen: has(status.completionTime)
----

> For example the following `KubeArchiveConfig` on the namespace "production" KubeArchive

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example the following `KubeArchiveConfig` in the namespace "production" KubeArchive
```

only archives pods when they are about to be deleted, as configured in the global filters
in the previous section:

[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: kubearchive.kubearchive.org/v1alpha1
kind: KubeArchiveConfig
metadata:
  name: kubearchive
  namespace: production
spec: {}
----

== Skipping Global Filters

Global filters are enforced but cluster owners can configure them so users
can choose to avoid them. The following `KubeArchiveConfig` allows
users to specify the label "prevent-archive" in their pods so they are not

> archived:

Reviewer 3: maybe I missed discussion about this, but this is also functionality that will need to be added to the sink

Author: I'm pretty sure this functionality is provided by the CEL expressions. If the global filters says "archive everything but things starting with "abc", you can prefix your thing with "abc" and it won't be archived. Does this make sense to you?

Reviewer 2: > Global filters are enforced but cluster owners can configure them so users
can choose to avoid them. The following `KubeArchiveConfig` allows
users to specify the label "prevent-archive" in their pods so they are not
archived:

No, no, no. This is not permitted.

Author: > No, no, no. This is not permitted.

I'm not sure if you are joking :rofl:

We can't enforce what the cluster owner writes in their KubeArchiveConfig custom resources, so they can have any exceptions they want.

Reviewer 2: >We can't enforce what the cluster owner writes in their KubeArchiveConfig custom resources, so they can have any exceptions they want.

Actually, we can. They can write it, but we don't have to use it.

See [this code](https://github.com/kubearchive/kubearchive/blob/main/cmd/operator/internal/controller/kubearchiveconfig_controller.go#L435-L441).

Even if we allowed the global configs to use it, there's no way for a user to specify `ApiServerSource` configuration specific to their namespace.

Author: I see. So this means that the specific example is wrong, as `kar.Selector.Selector` is not passed. However this is achievable with the CEL expressions. Is this right?

Reviewer 2: > However this is achievable with the CEL expressions. Is this right?

What is achievable? The user overriding what is specified in the global filters?  No, I don't think it is.

Author: > What is achievable? The user overriding what is specified in the global filters? No, I don't think it is.

That is clear, users can't override global filters.

In a scenario where the global `archiveWhen` is:

```
!(has(metadata.labels) && 'prevent-archive' in metadata.labels)
```

If a user has a resource that contains the `prevent-archive` label, that resource does not get archived. This is not the user avoiding the global filters, but the cluster owners providing a hole in their filter so users can choose to skip it.

Reviewer 2: Sure, that will work. The cluster admin is allowing it.

But the user isn't doing anything with their filters to allow it to happen.

I don't know why we have to document this specific use case.

Reviewer: I believe that this information is useful for the cluster admins, in case they want to configure kubeArchive in a flexible way for the users and also for the users in case they want to start a conversation with the cluster admin and see if an exception could be provided.

Reviewer 3: I see this as more of tip rather than a feature, but think pointing out stuff like this can be useful

Reviewer 2: We can document this if you like. But we can't give tips on everything. We have to assume some knowledge of CEL expressions and how they can be used.  There's logic involved here, and there's no way around it.

You can also have things archived after a certain time interval has passed.  Or if the name begins with a certain prefix. Or if they have an annotation.  Or a particular status. There's a million different options.

 And while this is possible and your use case is plausible, it's not what we were asked for.  The request was to be able to set global filtering to *force* archiving regardless of what the user specifies.  What's implemented allows for both.

Reviewer: > The request was to be able to set global filtering to force archiving regardless of what the user specifies

The thing is that when I read that global filtering "forces" archiving, I can't help to ask: but is there any way to avoid that or create exceptions?

My intention wasn't to document exactly one way of not applying the global filters for all resources of a kind but just letting know the reader that CEL expressions are flexible enough to generate exceptions for archiving a resource so the different namespaces can generate "non-archivable" resources if the global filter allows that.

If you think that giving an example is too much, I am ok with using just a sentence in a "TIP" section.

Author: After let it simmer for a bit, I will remove the block and merge without it. I there is a lot of questions around this we can add the block again to the documentation.

Reviewer 3: closing this thread since the lines for this comment were removed
